news: GRASS GIS - GSoC 2024 students and projects (#435)
OSGeo/grass-website: content/news/2024_05_27_GSoC_2024_students.md

---

> title: "GRASS GIS in Google Summer of Code 2024"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Google Summer of Code 2024"
```

date: 2024-05-07T14:12:42-05:00
layout: "news"

> author: Anna Petrasova and the GRASS Development Team

Reviewer: Add yourself there, no?

> author: Anna Petrasova and the GRASS Development Team

Author: ```suggestion
author: Anna Petrasova, Veronica Andreo and the GRASS Development Team
```

---

> ### Four Google Summer of Code students will be contributing to GRASS GIS this summer!

Reviewer: Shorter will look better I think
```suggestion
### Four GSoC students will be contributing to GRASS GIS this summer!
```

<a href="https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2024/organizations/osgeo-open-source-geospatial-foundation">
  <img src="https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/assets/media/logo-sun.svg"
   alt="GSoC logo"
   title="GSoC logo"
   width="20%" style="float:right;padding-left:15px;padding-top:10px">
</a>

We are thrilled to announce that the 

> **GRASS GIS project got four Google Summer of Code students this year!** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**GRASS GIS project got four Google Summer of Code (GSoC) students this year!** 
```

> They will be working together with their mentors in enhancing 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They will be working together with their mentors on enhancing 
```

different GRASS tools and capabilities. 

Let's go briefly through some details on each project and their forseen broader impacts. 

#### Parallelization of GRASS GIS existing tools

- Student: **Chung-Yuan Liang**
- Mentors: Huidae Cho, Vaclav Petras

> This project is aimed at parallelizing geospatial tools/algorithms to enhance 
> GRASS GIS capabilities to utilize and analyze large-scale geospatial and remote 
> sensing data. 
> While GRASS GIS already has several tools that offer the option to be run in 
> parallel, and some other were parallelized during GSoC 2021, in this
> opportunity, the targets are:  
> *r.texture, r.proj, r.mapcalc, r.horizon, r.viewshed, v.to.rast, r.to.vect*. 
> Parallelization should significantly accelerate their processing capabilities 
> and bring immediate performance gains in workflows and tools making use of them. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this project is to parallelize geospatial tools and algorithms
within GRASS GIS, enhancing its capabilities to process and analyze large-scale
geospatial and remote sensing data efficiently.
While GRASS GIS already includes several tools capable of parallel execution,
and some were parallelized during GSoC 2021, this project aims to
parallelize additional tools to improve their processing speed. Potential targets
include tools like *r.texture, r.proj, r.mapcalc, r.horizon, r.viewshed,
v.to.rast,* and *r.to.vect*. This effort will bring immediate performance
gains to workflows and applications utilizing these tools.
```

#### Improve GRASS user experience in Jupyter Notebook 

- Student: **Riya Saxena**
- Mentors: Anna Petrasova, Corey White

The python package [`grass.jupyter`](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass83/manuals/libpython/grass.jupyter.html) 
was developed during GSoC 2021 to simplify running GRASS GIS from Jupyter Notebooks
and displaying data. 

> This project will focus on enhancing the user experience by adding features such
> as increased interactivity of displayed data to enable query of raster and vector 
> attribute, draw a box to set the computational region or draw simple geometries to 
> add as GRASS vector maps; use of custom projections with `InteractiveMap` class to
> speed up visualization of large maps; and parallelization to speed up rendering of 
> `SeriesMap` and `TimeseriesMap` classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project aims to enhance the user experience by incorporating new features.
These enhancements will include increased interactivity for displayed data, enabling
the querying of raster and vector attributes, drawing a box to set the computational
region, and creating simple geometries to add as GRASS vector maps. The `InteractiveMap`
class will support custom projections to accelerate the visualization of large maps,
while parallelization will be implemented to expedite rendering in the `SeriesMap`
and `TimeseriesMap` classes.
```

<a href="/images/news/gsoc_2024_students_and_mentors.png">
  <img src="/images/news/gsoc_2024_students_and_mentors.png"
   alt="GSoC 2024 - GRASS GIS students and mentors"
   title="GSoC 2024 - GRASS GIS students and mentors"
   width="60%" style="float:right;padding-left:15px;padding-top:5px">
</a>

#### Add JSON output to different tools in C

- Student: **Kriti Birda**
- Mentors: Corey White, Vaclav Petras

> Most GRASS GIS tools that output text have custom human readable outputs.
> However, they could benefit from storing their output in a portable and commonly
> used data format like [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html). 
> This project will add JSON as an output format to various existing tools, as well as
> Python test cases to verify the output works as intended. 
> An option to specify the desired output format (plain or JSON) will 
> also be added and the layout of the JSON format will be optimized towards an 
> easy ingestion with Pandas in order to streamline the integration into Python 
> workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most GRASS GIS tools currently produce custom human-readable outputs in text
format, but they could greatly benefit from adopting a more portable and widely
recognized data format such as [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html).
This project aims to expand the capabilities of these tools by adding JSON as
an alternative output format.
The layout of the JSON format will be optimized specifically for easy
integration with Pandas, a popular Python library for data analysis, thus
facilitating seamless integration into Python workflows.
This initiative will enhance the versatility and interoperability of GRASS GIS
tools within modern data science environments.
```

#### Add EODAG support to GRASS GIS

- Student: **Hamed Elgizery**
- Mentors: Luca DeLucchi, Veronica Andreo, Stefan Bluementrath

> GRASS GIS has currently various modules to download satellite data: 
> *i.sentinel.download, i.landsat.download, i.modis.download*. However, they all 
> use different libraries, and some of them are no longer maintained. 
> This project will focus on implementing the use of 
> [EODAG](https://eodag.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) 
> as back-end for those tools and thus, decreasing the maintenance burden 
> needed to keep up with all the different APIs updates. 
> Furthermore, since EODAG provides a generalized API as an abstraction of 
> various data providers, there is the potential to significantly extend the 
> currently supported imagery data in GRASS GIS. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GRASS GIS currently offers several modules for downloading satellite data:
*i.sentinel.download, i.landsat.download, i.modis.download*. However, these
modules use different libraries, and some are no longer maintained. This project
aims to implement the use of [EODAG](https://eodag.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) as
the backend for these tools, reducing the maintenance burden associated with
managing multiple API updates. Additionally, leveraging EODAG's generalized API,
which abstracts various data providers, has the potential to significantly expand
the supported imagery data within GRASS GIS.

```

---
title: "Google Summer of Code 2024"

> date: 2024-05-07T14:12:42-05:00

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2024-05-27T14:12:42-05:00
```

Start of GSoC
